80% of cancers can be prevented. And
that's another thing, obesity has now
replaced smoking as one of the top risk
factors in getting cancer. The continued
view that cancer is a genetic disease is
largely responsible for maintaining
death of people. Once the field comes to
realize this is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease of energy metabolism,
we will drop the death rate by more than
50% in 5 years. No question about it.
The question for you is, is cancer
preventable?
A guy was diagnosed with advanced
prostate cancer, high hypertension, high
blood pressure, and type 2 diabetes. His
oncologist told me it's late. We have
nothing to do for you. You already dead.
I find the solution, autophagy. And who
spoke about autophagy? Of course, the
Nobel Prize 2016,
Thomas Seyfried. And he did water only
fasting metabolic therapy. Prostate
cancer went into total remission. Type 2
diabetes went away. Hypertension, high
blood pressure, everything went away.
So, this is what I'm saying.
Metabolic therapy
will get rid of a lot of things
besides your cancer. So, I really wanted
to just briefly, as a last thing, to
talk about the worst foods that feed
cancer cells.
If you could give a list of them, what
would they be?
So, I think anything that
Just a quick one, if you're on carnivore
and you experience cravings, maybe
you're in a weight loss stall, or maybe
you want to know if you should follow
high-fat carnivore or high-protein
carnivore. Well, the October Carnivore
Challenge is now open, and Dr. Robert
Kiltz and Dr. Ted Naiman are going to be
joining us to cover all of these topics,
including our 10-year carnivore coaches.
So, if you'd like to join, there is a
clickable link in the description of
this video with 20% off just for you.
And if you love this interview, please
feel free to hit that subscribe button.
Professor Seyfried, welcome.
Oh, it's nice to be here, Rina. Thank
you very much.
Well, the one thing from researching
every part of the work that you do is
that you really understand the biology
about cancer, how cancer starts. And
even you say that cancer is overtaking
heart disease as the number one killer.
So, today Professor Seyfried is going to
discuss how cancer starts and the worst
foods that feed cancer cells. And the
big question that we all want to know,
is cancer preventable? But before we get
into all that, Professor Seyfried, I
would love to know, why are you on a
mission to fight cancer? Um
Yeah, well, I don't I don't know
Yeah, maybe it is a mission, but um
we've been doing research on cancer for
uh more than 30 years.
And um
like many many many people uh who do
research on cancer, often times it's
completely disconnected
from uh what goes on in the clinic. Uh
it's what we call basic research
uh with little if any um translatable
uh connection to the guys to folks that
are actually dealing with with the
disorder themselves.
But we do in um in vivo work uh models
natural natural models of cancer, not
these um
these genetically engineered
kinds of things uh that aren't really
representative of what happens in the
clinic.
So, we had this for studies of
glycobiology uh predominantly,
but um when we started using calorie
restricted diets and things like this,
we would notice that um many of the
hallmarks of cancer in the environment
of the tumor and the tumor themselves uh
became a much less aggressive and
sometimes would get very small, which
then linked us to the work of Otto
Warburg, who clearly said that cancer
was a metabolic disease, not a genetic
disease.
Uh and yet we scratched our head and
said, well, the entire field of the
world the world all cancer organizations
in the world say cancer is a genetic
disease, including the National Cancer
Institute of the United States.
And then, as a trained geneticist, I
understand genetics very very well. And
I started to seriously question the
foundation upon which the whole field
was based
um from our own biochemical experiments
to my knowledge of genetics. And then we
began to put the pieces together to find
out that the
the Warburg Otto Warburg from the 20th
century was actually correct in showing
that cancer originated from the energy
disruption energy metabolism, not from
gene mutations. And then I went and and
clearly
collected data that absolutely
eviscerates the entire somatic mutation
theory. Uh it's not right. And it's
indirectly responsible for the for the
continued progression of cancer, the
continued deaths of cancer. The
continued view that cancer is a genetic
disease is largely responsible for
maintaining death of people.
By by recognizing that cancer is a
genetic disease and not a metabolic
disease, you inadvertently are treating
people
in an incorrect way, thus contributing
to the disease itself. So, until the the
the field comes to realize that cancer
is not a genetic disease, until they
realize that, we're not going to make
any major headway in dropping the death
rate. Once that once the field comes to
realize this is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease of energy metabolism,
we will drop the death rate by more than
50% in 5 years. No question about it.
The problem is you're up against massive
institutional systems that hold that
this is a genetic disease, so that many
of the treatments that we're currently
using remain in place
uh largely for um dogmatic ideology as
well as well as revenue generation.
So, you have these big forces
that are in the way, that are blocking
the advance of treating cancer as a
metabolic disease and seeing outcomes
much much uh better than what we
presently have.
Absolutely. And as you say, it is no
different towards treating heart
disease, diabetes, all these metabolic
syndromes. They're at the heart of our
lifestyle, our diet, and our all the
chronic inflammation that we're living
these days. And the fact that you have
big companies, big corps, big big pharma
trying to push drugs per se
for profit could be the reason why we
have all these, you know, traditional
standard of care therapies that are
actually don't solve the problem,
but they kind of exacerbate the problem.
It's not a cure, it's not a fix. The fix
is what you're talking about, which is
what you said, metabolic therapy. But I
wanted to take a step back, which is to
understand the root cause of cancer. You
mentioned that cancer is a cause of
mitochondrial dysfunction, metabolic
mitochondrial dysfunction. So, to
understand the root cause of cancer,
it's first important to understand, what
is the mitochondria for people that
might not know?
Yeah, well, this is uh
in in classes of cell biology.
Um the cell uh
for for other purposes, let's just do a
circle.
Uh everybody understands there's a
nucleus inside the cell.
We I think, well, I can't be sure about
everybody, but even the most
remedially trained cell biologist knows
we have a cell. There's a cell wall
that that incorporates inside the
nucleus. But we have other organelles as
well. So, we call them organelles just
like we call organs in our body, the
liver, the kidney, the spleen. These are
organs. Well, inside the cell there are
organelles
uh that allow the cell to function. And
the nucleus is one, of course. And then
you have the mitochondrion, which is a
second organelle, major organelle. They
have lysosomes and Golgi apparatus and
endoplasmic reticulum. You have a whole
bunch of things. But the mitochondrion
is actually another type of organism.
It's it's another organism with its own
DNA that lives inside the cell. So, it
has a
genetic apparatus independent uh
different from that of the genetic in
the nucleus.
So, you have this other organelle. And
this organelle, the mitochondrion, is
like a spaghetti network in the inside
the cell.
Um it makes the energy so that the cell
can do its normal functions. So, if it's
a liver cell, it will do liver cell uh
stuff, maintaining blood glucose,
maintaining metabolic homeostasis. If
it's in the neuron of the brain, it
maintains electrical signaling capacity.
If it's in the kidney, it it it plays a
role in fluid balances. Uh so, every one
of the cells in our body
uh has a particular function in the
society of cells. And the energy that's
used for all of this is the
mitochondrion. And it and and we and the
energy comes from us breathing oxygen.
So, every breath of oxygen that we take
into our body uh serves as an acceptor
of mitochondrial electrons to allow that
organelle to produce ATP, which is the
chemical
energy. It's the chemical energy. It
allows our cells to do everything. And
the waste products
are CO2 and water. Almost like a
gasoline engine in an automobile.
Uh it produces CO2 and water and and
other breakdown products of uh uh uh of
um the gasoline itself.
Uh, but the bottom line is that engine
works on oxygen. If there's no oxygen,
the car engine will shut down cuz you
have to have a a spark uh to ignite the
combustion. We we use the oxygen for
controlled combustion and that
controlled combustion is in the
mitochondria and that mitochondria
produces the energy so that all cells in
our body can work and every cell has a
mitochondria except red blood cells.
Uh, but most of them uh our cells have
this mitochondria.
This mitochondria allows the cell to
remain
uh quiescent in a differentiated state.
In other words, a state doing what it's
supposed to do uh to maintain metabolic
homeostasis so that all of our organs,
brain, liver function all work together
because of the energy metabolism cuz
we're all breathing.
So, when that when that uh organelle
gets corrupted in any particular way in
any particular cell um uh the cell
either outright dies if the energy there
is is restricted to such a great extent
or in the case of cancer uh it's a
chronic interruption of energy from that
organelle, the mitochondria. Chronic.
Acute disruption will kill the cell. Uh,
but chronic disruption will allow the
cell to slowly adapt to an alternative
form of energy which we call
fermentation energy which is energy
without oxygen. And over years, uh
months or years or decades uh some of
these cells gradually adapt to this
other form of energy because the
mitochondria become chronically
incapable of providing energy.
The mitochondria also control the
quiescent state. And what happens is
they slowly lose grip on the energy
within the cell. This fermentation takes
over and cells begin to divide
disregulated division. Division out of
cell division out of control which is
the definition of cancer. The definition
of cancer is cell division out of
control.
Uh, the ultimate result is a tumor that
people uh a tumor. Where did the tumor
come from? Came it came from a gradual
disruption of energy metabolism from
mitochondria leading to disregulated
cell growth.
Cells are falling back on on energy
without oxygen which is the way all
cells on the planet uh got oxygen before
oxygen came into the atmosphere 2.5
billion years ago.
So, these cells are simply doing nothing
more than falling back on ancient
pathways that were always present but
now become dominant in these tumor cells
and that allows the cell to grow in a
disregulated grow way because the
organelle that controls growth
regulation is now dysfunctional.
And the cells have switched from from
respiration using oxygen to energy
without oxygen which is fermentation.
How that happens from it can happen from
any number of assaults or insults to a
population of cells in a particular
organ. What are they? Exposure to
chemical carcinogens, intermittent
hypoxia, exposure to radiation
old age, viral infections, hepatitis,
papilloma viruses um rare rare inherited
uh germline mutations that disrupts the
disrupt mitochondrial function. Any of
these are called secondary risk factors.
So, this of a whole variety of things in
the environment that can cause a
disrupted energy metabolism in a cell
thereby leading to mitochondrial
disruption uh and disregulated cell
growth. So one person's uh breast cancer
could come from a carcinogen, another
one from an occluded milk duct causing
intermittent hypoxia, another one from
exposure to radiation, another one from
the bracha gene, another one from uh
just being older. So, any of these could
cause a a tumor in a particular organ
through any variety of causes. All of
the the primary cause and the only cause
for the disruption uh uh cell growth is
damage to the oxidative phosphorylation
capacity in the mitochondria. That is
the origin of cancer whether it happens
in the brain, colon, breast uh bladder,
lung uh uh
all of these. So, there's one common
origin, disruption of oxidative
phosphorylation leading to fermentation.
So, all cancers regardless of their
origin are highly fermentative cells out
of
uh disregulated in their growth driven
by two fermentable fuels which is the
sugar glucose and the amino acid
glutamine. They are the two major fuels
that we have found driving all cancers
making cancer a singular disease of
energy metabolism, not a complex
hodgepodge of all kinds of diseases.
It's not that complicated.
And that's what what was so fascinating
about your work. This is the these two
things about glucose and glutamine. I
think a lot of people understand the
glucose, the sugar
um and that we need to eliminate, you
know, sugars, a lot of the excess
carbohydrates to actually
reduce the risk of cancer, reduce the
risk of disease. But there was something
that you mentioned a around glucose
Well, wait wait wait wait wait wait. No,
you you can't uh sugar does not sugar is
not a carcinogen, okay? Sugar does not
cause cancer.
If you have a tumor, it will feed on the
sugar. But sugar itself is not a
carcinogen. So, carcinogens are
chemicals that cause cancer. Sugar by
itself does not cause damage to the
mitochondria, okay? But excess sugar in
the bloodstream can lead to systemic
inflammation. And systemic inflammation
can damage mitochondria in cells. So, we
have to we have to know how to parse out
cause and effects of things. That's a
that's a very interesting clarification
because I think a lot of people think
sugar as maybe I kind kind of mentioned
previously is the toxin that's going to
cause cancer but it's the elevated
glucose consistently in our bloodstream
over the long period of time that causes
inflammation. It might not even show up
as cancer. It could be brain disease, it
could be heart disease, it could be
anything. All these problems that we are
seeing is coming from chronic
inflammation. So I wanted to just
backtrack before we get into the
glucose, the glutamine, the worst foods
and all the rest of it. You mentioned
right at the beginning that
cancer is not a genetic disease. We're
not born with cancer. It is something
that is a metabolic disfunction in our
mitochondria.
And there were some experiments called
the nuclear transfer experiments which
prove this. Could you talk more about
that which actually proves the fact that
cancer is not a genetic disease and more
of a metabolic dysfunction? Yeah, well,
the the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments certainly are the most
powerful evidence that it cannot be a
genetic disease. But we also know that
there are some cancers that have no
mutations. Um people don't like to talk
about that but they're there. We've we
you know, there's have shown that. Um
that there are and there are some um
carcinogens like asbestos that can cause
cancer without causing mutations. So, we
we have these things and now we we now
know uh the field had said that there
only certain kinds of mutations that
cause cancer and they're called driver
these so-called driver gene mutations.
That was considered uh the cause of
cancer. But now through through newer
experiments, we're beginning to see that
normal cell like you are young young
lady uh if we took a sample of various
parts of your organs and did a genomic
screen, we'd see these so-called cancer
driver genes already expressed but you
don't have any cancer. So, a lot of a
lot of so with the very driver genes
that were supposed to cause cancer are
found in normal tissues that never never
have cancer. But the nuclear transfer
experiments are the most powerful
because there's where you can take the
nucleus of the cell which is supposed to
contain the mutations and put it take
that nucleus and put it into another
cell where a normal cell where that
normal nucleus was removed and the
cytoplasm containing the normal
mitochondria are there and you take that
cancer nucleus and put it into that cell
uh and then take that cell and put it
into a a mouse or a rat to see whether
or not it forms cancer and the answer is
it does not form cancer even though it
has the tumor nucleus there. On the
other hand, if you take the normal cell
and remove the the nucleus of the normal
cell and put it into a a tumor cell
where the nucleus of the tumor cell has
been removed. So, you're putting the the
nucleus of a normal cell into the
cytoplasm of a tumor cell and then put
that into the rat, that grows like
crazy.
So, that becomes the tumor. So, what it
says is the origin of cancer is not in
the nucleus with the gene mutations,
it's in the cytoplasm with the
mitochondria. So, the mitochondria in
the cytoplasm of the are the controllers
or drive controllers of of quiescence or
the drivers of disregulated cell growth.
So, clearly we know the origin of cancer
is not a genetic nuclear genetic
disease. I went through the entire
scientific literature and put all those
independent experiments together in one
composite paper that makes it the only
way you could think that cancer is a
genetic disease is through dogmatic
ideology
or
uh cognitive uh um
difficulty. So,
so there's no way any rational human
mind would have to sit there and say
cancer cannot be a genetic disease. So,
yeah, cognitive cognitive challenge I
guess is a better term for for that.
Cognitive dissonance. It's It's a kind
of nice way to say that. You know, it's
interesting when people come up with
these different ways of thinking about
disease which really challenges the
traditional theory. And I was listening
to a lot of your work which is talking
about the standard of care and that, you
know, the standard of care which is
radiation therapy, chemotherapy, it
doesn't treat the root cause. It's
making the problem worse. Yeah, in many
cases it does. Now, we don't forget we
have millions and millions of cancer
survivors on the planet who have taken
standard of care and have been cured of
their cancer.
Um, but many many many of perhaps even
most of those folks pay a significant
price
in overall health for having that chance
to live longer.
Neuropsychiatric problems, hormonal
imbalances, digestive issues, growth
problems, all kinds of problems have
come as the result of surviving toxic
radiation and toxic poisons. And many of
them, not all of them, but some will go
on to develop all kinds of new cancers
as the result of the toxic treatment uh
uh of of these cancers. And the new the
new therapy that every many people are
talking about are called
immunotherapies.
Uh you hear PD-1, Opdivo, Keytruda.
They're advertised on television.
They're advertised in magazines. CAR T
immunotherapy. Um, these are all based
on the somatic mutation theory of
cancer. If the somatic mutation theory
of cancer is is not correct, then the
the outcome of many of these
new therapies in conjunction with
radiation and chemo and all this other
stuff is unlikely to have a major impact
in reducing deaths. And that's clear. I
mean, cancer is getting worse and worse,
not getting better and better. So, all
this new stuff is not working. And I'll
tell you one thing that's very
interesting.
Uh some of the people that do really
well on CAR T immunotherapy or some of
the immunotherapies, the ones that do
best are the ones that develop the high
fever.
Uh high fever is often associated with
therapeutic success. A long time ago, uh
William Coley used to inject live
bacteria into people causing massively
high fevers in cancer patients. And he
had such an incredible cure rate. Uh 95%
of the patients that he gave back to
the body would launch an incredible
heat
fever and attack cytokine attack. Uh and
cancer would be destroyed by the by the
heat. And the the the mutations that
exist in cancer prevent the tumor cells
from adapting to heat stress. So, they
up and die.
So, the simple Now, here's the
situation. You can take you can pay
$250,000
to get an immunotherapy that works
because it gives you a fever. Or you can
take some
pyrogen that would give you a fever and
get the same result for pennies. So, um
Really? You kidding? Absolutely. So, so
this is the whole thing.
The because the folks that do all If you
think cancer is a genetic disease, you
have no clue. You think it's working
because your immune system is the
attack. It's the It's the because
because if the patient doesn't get a
high fever, the immunotherapies don't
really work. So, they work on the papers
that people that get high fever. So, it
has nothing to do with the $200,000.
So, once you understand the biology of
the disease, most of the stuff we're
doing makes no sense.
It's actually It's actually harmful. And
as a matter of fact, the dirty secret of
immunotherapy is we call
hyperprogressive disease which means
that about 20 to
15 to 20% of people getting
immunotherapies die faster because the
the immunotherapy kills them before the
cancer does.
So, yes, there's 20% that do well
that can survive and a lot of them do
well because they had a fever. So,
when you put all that together, you got
to understand the biology of this
disease. It's really It's really scary.
And that's why you are so amazing
because you understand the biology of
what cancer is, explaining the mutations
in the gene and the root cause of it and
then how to fix it because many people I
think many doctors they just follow I
don't want to say this in a bad way.
But they follow what they've been taught
in in medical school and they don't have
the kind of the I guess the time or the
power to actually do their own research
and to understand the biology of even
not even cancer but heart disease. Even
we understand with, you know, heart
attacks, heart disease that it's
completely preventable.
The question for you is is cancer
preventable?
Well, I mean, Otto Warburg said that he
said 80% of all cancers could be
prevented. Um, but now we understand he
didn't really know.
And this is where our work has expanded
what Otto Warburg originally said. He
was trying to focus on improving
B vitamins and and things like this.
Um, but the real way to
let's put it this way. You can't
It's extremely difficult to get cancer
in any cell where the mitochondria in
that cell are healthy.
Um, so healthy mitochondria
prevent cancer. So, the question is how
do you maintain healthy mitochondria?
And
that's why
keep nutritional ketosis.
Ketone bodies
are burned in the mitochondria with
unbelievable efficiency. Um, my my late
good friend Dr. Richard Veech from the
National Institutes of Health showed how
mitochondrial metabolism increases the
energy efficiency in mitochondria and
produce very few reactive oxygen species
which are damaging radicals. And you can
you can keep your mitochondria humming
at the most energy efficiency if you can
go into ketosis.
Um, now what is ketosis? Now, our
species, human beings, evolved in a
food-restricted environment. Uh we were
always for for long tens of thousands of
years in our origin. We were always in
ketosis because we had very few
carbohydrates in the in the in the
environment. Uh we were always in a
semi-hungry, starved state. And the
foods that we ate were very very low in
carbohydrates, you know, we'd kill
animals. Uh we would eat different kinds
of plants.
But we wouldn't have high carbohydrate
foods. So, the foods of our ancestors
were very low in carbohydrates putting
us in nutritional ketosis. And that's
why cancer in aboriginal folks that
still are on the planet, cancer is
almost unknown, unheard of. In these
aboriginal tribes of people who live
according to their traditional ways
which was no high carbohydrate foods, a
lot of exercise, their my mitochondria
maintained in a super energy state, and
cancer does not exist.
Let's put it that way. Only very rarely.
It's a very It's almost like finding a
needle in a haystack to find a tumor in
an aboriginal person who living
according to natural ways. And yet
cancer in our western society is the
replacing heart disease number one
killer. So, now we should focus how to
prevent cancer is obviously cancer is
being caused by our western diet and
lifestyle.
So, that's what's causing cancer. So,
what is it in our western diet and
lifestyle that's allowing our
mitochondria become damaged leading to
dysregulated cell growth? And there's a
whole range of things.
Minimal exercise, um
massive amounts of highly processed
carbohydrate foods in our
stress of the kinds of jobs that we're
doing. Um,
so you put all that together and we put
ourselves at risk not only for cancer
but cardiovascular disease, type 2
diabetes, dementia, Alzheimer's disease,
you know, macular degeneration.
You can go down the whole list of
chronic diseases. And you can start to
see a dramatic increase in all kinds of
inflammatory chronic diseases as the
result of our diet and lifestyle.
The genetics has very little to do with
this. As a matter of fact, our genes
protect us. They do the best job they
can at trying to protect us from all
this stuff, but we overwhelm the
protective capacity of our body by
putting ourselves into these very risky
kinds of conditions.
And you know, the in the study that came
out on Mediterranean diet reducing
dementia and cardiovascular disease and
cancer, it wasn't the Mediterranean diet
by itself. It was a diet that had no
highly processed carbohydrates.
So,
you know, so you want to get cancer, you
want to get demented, you want to get a
type 2 diabetes, make sure that you are
obese and you keep your blood sugars
really really high. And then you'll put
yourself you'll be able to get into the
crowd of those that have all these
chronic diseases. Uh and that's another
thing. Obesity has now replaced smoking
as one of the top risk factors in
getting cancer.
So, and and as you said, if people were
really really really interested in
preventing cancer, we would not have an
obesity epidemic.
So, all this stuff is perfectly logical.
But I have to be honest with you. Uh the
foods that are being engineered, highly
processed carbs that are being
engineered, are very tasty to a large
number of people. They're cheap, they're
convenient, and they're tasty. And we
evolved to like very sweet carbohydrate
foods. It's just they weren't available
in the environment. Now they're
available in an abundance, and we pay a
price for that. Absolutely. And many of
my audience, we follow a carnivore
lifestyle. So I I'm I'm very keen to
hear your thoughts about because you
talk about a ketogenic diet, and that is
primarily high in fat. And especially if
you do have active cancer, even the
likes of Dr. Oz,
they talk about therapeutic ketosis. So
that is increasing your fat, even
sometimes decreasing your protein to try
to flood your body with fat and ketones
so that the cancer or anything that you
have that is inflammatory cannot
survive. I'm curious around your
thoughts around carnivore or even keto
as a lifestyle to prevent all disease.
Well, this is a good point. Well, we
developed the glucose ketone index
calculator and published this.
This is the way to let people know
whether or not they're in ketosis.
So some people say, "Oh yeah, I I eat a
ketogenic diet." I say, "What's your
GKI?" Well, I never measured. Well, how
do you know you're in ketosis?
You have to have a blood measurement to
know where you are.
Not what you think. So the Keto Mojo
meter, which is available through
Amazon,
allows a lot of Well, we built it for
the cancer folks
so that they can know how to kill their
tumor cells
and also deliver drugs when the when the
pants cancer patient is in ketosis, they
the drug delivery can kill the tumor
cells much more effectively.
The drugs take on tremendous power when
the patient is in ketosis.
Even then you can cut all your
chemotherapy drugs in half or even lower
than that sometimes. Really has
tremendous power. But the guys who are
just in the society that want to stay
healthy and think they're in nutritional
ketosis, they can use the meter to see
whether or not they're in that in that
state. Now my good friend Dom D'Agostino
is always in ketosis. Dom eats meat,
yeah, eggs,
certain vegetables and things.
He's just eating more of a Paleolithic
lifestyle. And
yeah, so I mean, you have to think of
our ancestors our Paleolithic ancestors
ate a lot of meat,
but the meat was organic. I mean, you're
killing You know how much energy it
takes to run after a deer and kill it
and then drag it back and cut it up and
eat it. You got to use a lot of energy
on this. And then what are you eating?
Organ meat, you're eating the flesh.
There's not a lot of carbohydrates in
this. But but you get a lot of energy to
So if if
Now vegans, I understand they may have
an adverse whatever, but if our
ancestors if our ancestors were vegans,
we you and I would not exist today on
the planet. Thank you.
Did you hear that? Did you
Did you hear that? So
No, but I'm just saying you have to go
back Paleolithic period. Yeah, I'm not
anti I'm not anti anything. I think that
if you believe in something and if it
works for you, do it. But the fact that
even you're saying, Professor, that it's
really unlikely that our ancestors were
vegans, that you could actually survive
on a no meat diet.
Yeah, you couldn't. It would be
impossible. Because there wasn't in the
We didn't have farm. Now today, because
we farm wheat and corn and rice and all
this other stuff, which has it You can
replace
the energy from meat with enough farmed
vegetables and things like this. You can
certainly for religious or
cultural reasons, you can certainly
replace meat with vegetables for today.
The issue that we're finding, it's a
little bit more difficult to get into
nutritional ketosis
on a purely vegan You can.
But you have to eat very few like eat,
you know, one leaf of lettuce every
every other day. Yeah, you'll you'll get
into ketosis for sure. You know, but but
again, it's going back to water only
fasting or or this kind of thing. That
gets you into ketosis, but it's hard.
It's not easy. So when we
when we look at cancer patients, we
usually I don't because I'm not a
physician. My my my physician colleagues
will will say you have to
go on a zero carb diet for about 10 to
14 days.
You can eat some meat, fish, and things
like this or or plants, whatever
whatever brings you down into
nutritional ketosis.
And then the step off from nutritional
ketosis to water only fasting,
it's not such a it's not such a dramatic
jump. If you go cold turkey,
if you're eating a you know, a high carb
diet or just the Western diet and then
stop eating that for for several days,
man, it's tough. I mean, it's not it's
not it's not easy at all. You're you're
you very uncomfortable, headaches, you
know, shaking, all this kind of stuff.
But if you do
a zero carb diet for for for 10 or 14
days, the jump now to water only fasting
is much less stressful on the body. The
body now has acclimated itself, and
that's the best way to to really get
into this ketotic state. And you know,
some people like Dom D'Agostino, he's
always in this state because that's his
diet. He's always active, a lot of
physical activity. He eats foods that
are very low in carbohydrates, very
highly nutritious, and
he's always in nutritional ketosis. And
a lot of folks are like that. They do
these Paleolithic things and and stuff
like that. But but you can measure your
GKI so that so that you know whether And
is it good to stay in the zone forever?
No, I I mean, Dom seems to do it. He
likes, you know, he'll eat all kinds of
things to keep him in that zone. But
most folks in the society don't. You
want to go out You're in France,
every now and then you like a a baguette
with a little foie gras. You know, I
mean, let's be honest.
the foie gras, but I didn't have the
baguettes because when I have the
baguette, I just feel terrible. So I was
like, "You know what? Foie gras, I'm
going to try some foie gras while I'm in
France." But with the baguette, I'm
like, "You know what? I'm going to pass
because I feel terrible the next day." I
I
good. I have to be honest.
Absolutely. You kidding me? You rub that
big foie gras all over the baguette.
It's great. But yeah, but you don't do
it every day. You're not sitting here
every day pounding down big baguettes
with foie gras. I mean, let's be honest.
So
but every now and then, I mean, I live
in the society, too, you know, and I'll
eat a donut every now and then. I'm not
going to Well, this donut is going to
kill me. Yeah, if I ate it every day, it
would might it might kill me, but I'm
not going to eat one every day, you
know, but
it's just, you know, moving in and out.
You you've got to know
that if you get sick or you start
feeling bad, I tell you one thing, if
you start feeling bad for whatever
reason, don't eat for several days.
Whatever was bothering you generally
goes away. And that's the water fasting,
which is really really really hard. But
you mentioned the GKI, so so the glucose
ketone index, and I think I'm going to
get questions from people watching
around, "Can you tell us more about
that?" So you mentioned the Keto Mojo.
What are some numbers that we should be
looking at? Like you have a Keto Mojo,
how often should I be testing? Is it
before or after food? What time of day?
What are some numbers that I should be
hitting? I know I'm going to get these
questions. No, no, but you That's those
are all good, and there's a lot of folks
on the web
talking about GKI values and
you know, I built the diet I built the
my students and I built this GKI for the
cancer patients
to help them.
Then I realized all these health gurus
are out there, and they're all like
seeing who can get the lowest GKI and
feel the healthiest and all this kind of
stuff. Just to They have no cancer and
no they have no chronic diseases. They
just want to feel good and see how how
low they can get their GKI. Now for
cancer,
based on the patients' feedback, if you
can get a GKI value of 2.0 or below and
even below one, you're definitely in in
ketosis. That's where the millimolar of
ketones is equal to the millimolar of
glucose in the blood. Or sometimes the
ketones can go just a little bit higher.
You're never going People with normal
metabolism will rarely if ever get into
ketoacidosis,
which is the fear of the medical
community. That happens mostly in type 1
diabet People with type 1 diabetes
is that that's the fear for that group,
where blood sugar and ketones both are
extremely high in the blood. This is
a very dangerous situation. But most
people who have normal physiology can
get into low GKI values. It's It's like
It's like running a You just can't go
out and run a 26-mile marathon without
having some preparation. So
some You have to get yourself into
so-called shape.
And And say same thing with getting into
nutritional ketosis. It takes It takes a
little bit of adjustment in the diet and
lifestyle exercise
range. But yeah, if people can get into
these zones. So the first thing you do
is you measure your glucose ketone
index, and most people eating a Western
diet, you're talking about a range of
about 50. 50 to 60. Sometimes you drink
Coca-Cola and you can get up to 100. So
but you want low numbers, not high
numbers. It's just like golf. In golf,
you try to get the lowest number you
can. With the GKI, you try to get the
lowest number you can, right? So
like Dom D'Agostino, I mean, he showed
me one time he had a GKI of like 0.5.
And I'm saying, "Man, that's
unbelievable." So but what Dom did is he
did water only fasting for 4 days and
then drank one of his ketone solutions,
which made his blood sugar go down
further and his ketones go up go up a
little higher.
And he he was telling me this And he's
perfectly healthy. I mean, this guy is
not I mean, he
If you ever saw put him on the web,
you'll see. I've seen him. I've seen
him. He looks
Yeah, he's an athlete. But that's the
thing. It's not to say that anybody
watching needs to do water fasting or
anything crazy like that. It's really to
understand the different modalities that
you can get. We're trying to lower
inflammation. If you don't have active
cancer, you don't necessarily need to do
all these things, but you know the
reason why we choose a ketogenic
lifestyle, a carnivore lifestyle, a
higher fat, higher protein, close to
zero carb lifestyle is to improve and
get to your optimal health.
Well, let me let me just say that
some carbs are okay. Complex
carbohydrates that you can get from some
vegetables
and some things like this. I mean, not
all carbs are bad carbs.
You know, highly processed carbs are not
good, but we have complex carbohydrates
that you can get from some vegetables
and things like this, which are in fact
very healthy for the body. See, this is
the thing that I was really trying to
understand. I have been carnivore for
the last 3 years and then I was doing
keto for 10 years. I had really bad
sugar addiction, so I would binge. I had
a lot of bad gut issues.
So, for me the reason why carnivore
works and I think a lot of my viewers on
the channel, the reason why they follow
carnivore is a mixture of these reasons.
And sometimes when they eat vegetables,
they can get really bad chronic
inflammation.
Yes, yes. So, so I can really understand
with carnivore or any elimination diet
as a as a short protocol, even if it's,
you know, 60, 90 days. And then as
you're saying, to reintroduce some safe
carbohydrates. And these carbohydrates
are vegetables that are not as toxic as
other vegetables.
Yeah, and and some fruits as well. Like
when we were working in the epilepsy
field for decades, we would have to
maintain low constant GKI values or low
glucose values for the children with
epilepsy because they would have
breakthrough seizures as soon as the
blood sugar would go up. Um so, one of
and they, you know, they need to be
have appropriate nutrition. Uh but what
we found for vitamin C was great
grapefruits. Um grapefruit was a low
That's another thing, too. Low glycemic
foods. Foods that release glucose very,
very slowly into the bloodstream rather
than like white rice, potatoes, pasta,
all this stuff. This will give you a
high high shot glucose in the blood. But
grapefruit was a low glycemic. So, if
you if you look at the types of foods
that you want to try to say, "Well, I
want some carbs, but I want low glycemic
carbs." Then you can go There's a whole
list of of of foods on the web that will
tell you their glycemic index. And the
glycemic index
will will allow you to take in those
foods without spiking glucose and
thereby not not creating
a major shift in in in your GKI values.
The The other thing that we learned is
that emotional stress can make your
blood sugar go up uh because you release
corticosteroids into the blood, which is
a
a fight-flight kind of thing. Um and
that's how we learned about the GKI in
the first place because I had some
cancer patients
uh that would get into an argument with
a neighbor or a parking spot or whatever
and they would see their blood sugar
spiking. And I and I would say, "What's
your ketone?" Although ketones were
stable. So, it really didn't change the
GKI too much. Um so, glucose is a lot
more variable. If you can keep your
ketones at a steady level, you can
buffer some of the spikes that you might
get occasionally in glucose and then not
not throw out your GKI overall. But what
you, you know, and you're right. During
the course of a day, the GKI can vary.
And this is what we tell the cancer
patients. You got to know the point
during the course of a day when your
GKIs are the lowest. It could be For
some people, it's late morning. For some
people, it's late afternoon. For other
people, it's it's in the evening. So,
everybody is different. So, we don't
know. We can't say to anyone, "Everybody
do this." because it may not be
appropriate for your physiology. So,
each person has to has to learn their
own physiology. And then when they know
their that this is the part of the day
when I'm in the lowest GKI, that's when
we suggest they go into hyperbaric
oxygen for cancer, of course. This kills
cancer cells without radiation therapy.
So, it's really a super healthy way a
way to do it, but it has to be done with
the with the body's adaptability to the
to the particular GKI thing. And so, we
we do this. We work and that's why
individual and everybody's an individual
when it comes to metabolism. Some people
do well on one food, another person does
better on another food, but the bottom
line is your body
adjusts metabolically into a new
homeostatic state and you can use the
GKI as kind of a general marker
indicator.
But but, you know, people will learn
how they can
adjust themselves and stay in these
so-called healthy zones um and how long
they want to stay in there. And every
now and then you can step out
and step back in. But at least
have a life and go out and enjoy
something. Yes. You know,
It's fine. it's just that you you are
aware of it and you're taking charge of
your own physiology in a toxic world.
Absolutely. I wanted to ask about blood
sugar because
you know how you have these kind of
trends that you hear about all the time
about different things. Like 10 years
ago, it was like cholesterol is bad. Now
we're hearing insulin. Everything is
about insulin and then you want your
insulin to be as low as possible and
blood sugar and all the rest of it. Do
you think that insulin is also a driver
to elevated insulin is a driver towards
cancer metabolic disease? Oh, yeah. It's
a It's a marker of high blood sugar.
I mean,
when
when sugar is low, insulin goes down.
When sugar goes up, insulin goes up. So,
the problem is you get insulin
insensitivity. Your your body no longer
can control the level of insulin. So,
you're driving As soon as that sugar
comes in, you're driving it into fat. Um
so, and you're insulin insensitive. The
best way, which is type 2 diabetes, by
the way. So, the best way to get Some
obesity is associated with type 2
diabetes. But uh Virta Health, some
folks that I know, um Jeff Volek and
others, uh they cure type 2 diabetes
using metabolic therapy. So, you don't
need all these drugs. You don't need all
The easy But most people want the easy
way out. I'd rather have a pill than
have to take charge of me doing some
discipline personal discipline. I don't
want personal discipline. I want a I
want a drug.
Most people That's what we are. We we we
always want the most convenient way to
deal with a problem, right? And if you
can take
um What is it? Um Uh Ozempic. Ozempic
and all these inject yourself with all
that kind of stuff, uh then you can
maintain your obesity while not worrying
about all this other stuff. You know,
and and I'm saying to myself, "This is
nuts." Um you know, but those folks,
hey, listen. That's their life. They
want to do that, let them do it. And
then they become they don't understand
why they have all these And if you get
off those drugs, nobody knows how long
what's going to happen by staying on
them for so long. And nobody knows
what's going to happen when you get off
them. Um but if you can take charge of
your own lifestyle, but at least you
have tools. Uh you want to reduce cancer
risk, um exercise. You got to have
exercise. You got to keep your blood
sugar uh in a reasonable level. Don't
get into insulin insensitivity. Uh keep
your blood sugar low, insulin you're
become you re- recover insulin
sensitivity.
So, and then people say to me, "Well,
you can never Your liver will make
glucose
um even if you don't eat glucose." And
that's true. The liver gluconeogenesis
is made by the liver. But that's a very
low level of glucose. It helps the brain
out a little bit. And all the other
cells in the body then crave the
glucose, so you keep a very low stable
level of glucose. For a cancer cell, the
cancer cell now must compete with normal
cells that want the glucose.
And the cancer cell gets outcompeted
every time. So, so
um again, water only fasting it always
works really well to maintain
nutritional ketosis, low GKI values, low
insulin uh values. So, this is all diet
lifestyle. It all comes back to diet and
lifestyle. You know, but
how many people in our society, whether
you're in France, Germany,
United States, want to go back and live
like some caveman, you know, in a
Paleolithic period.
There are people that want to do this,
believe me. You always want something
out there. You know, I love that you're
very realistic because you see a lot of
people that talk about the dogma of
like, "Hey, this certain diet and this
certain way of living." But most people
can't adhere to such a strict lifestyle.
But understanding these fundamentals is
great so that you can reduce your
probability of having cancer,
Alzheimer's, heart disease, brain
disease, liver problems, and all these
different things.
You did mention metabolic therapy. So, I
really, really, really want This was
This is just fascinating. This is going
beyond traditional standard of care. Not
the not the chemotherapy, not the
radiation therapy. Diet and a drug
called DON, which is used to target
cancer. Can you talk about that, please?
Yeah, well, it's it's a glutamine
targeting drug. So,
because people always ask me, "What do
I"
Hundreds and hundreds of people. "What
can I eat to reduce glutamine?"
And you want You know the answer?
Nothing. The way you can reduce
glutamine is go on at least 2 to 3 weeks
water only. That lowers your blood
sugar. And the common response is, "Is
there anything other than that I do? Is
there anything" Yeah, there are drugs
that will do this. Uh one of the drugs
that I we think is is really effective
is M Bend is a parasite medication
called M Bendazole. A similar drug to
Fenbendazole. Uh we have some evidence
now that it will restrict glucose and
glutamine to some extent. Uh together
with
nutritional ketosis,
these drugs work remarkably well in
killing tumors. Uh yeah, one of the best
drugs is 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine. It
looks structurally looks very, very
similar to glutamine. Uh but it blocks a
major enzyme that breaks glutamine down.
So, you can't The body can't use it. You
have to be very careful with that drug.
Again, like biology, you really need to
know it's a tool. If you don't know how
to use it appropriately, it could be
harmful. But when used in appropriate
manner, which is dosage, timing, and
scheduling, together with the condition
of therapeutic ketosis, this is
remarkably powerful. And we're also
finding that once the body is in
ketosis, chemotherapies can be reduced
massively in their dosages and still
have good therapeutic benefit. Um so we
can reduce we can enhance therapy and
reduce toxicity massively uh with
metabolic therapy. So metabolic therapy
is just uh hammering hammering the tumor
cells out of existence using uh we call
press pulse uh that I've developed as
well. You you press certain things like
glucose can be pressed. The body does
not need glucose to survive. So we can
put a chokehold on that and then we
pulse the glutamine uh with glutamine
targeting drugs to uh gradually degrade
and eliminate tumors. Um this is an
elegant system of killing cancer cells
naturally without causing toxicity, but
at the same time improving overall
health of the patient. And some people
say this is very dangerous because it
got many folks who have cancer and uh uh
Guy Tanonbaum is on the web uh talking
about this. Uh Guy was diagnosed with
advanced prostate cancer, high
hypertension, high blood pressure, and
type 2 diabetes. And he did water only
fasting metabolic therapy and uh
the the prostate cancer went into total
remission. Type type 2 diabetes went
away. Hypertension, high blood pressure,
everything went away. And Guy's now So
this is what I'm saying.
Uh metabolic therapy uh uh will get rid
of a lot of things
uh besides your cancer.
And this is why it's dangerous. This is
why it's dangerous.
you meant dangerous like a bad thing.
I'm like well well that sounds good like
get getting rid of diabetes,
hypertension. I would be I was like oh
okay. It's a good thing that's dangerous
because it's such a good thing. So Yes,
well it's it's dangerous to a health
industry.
Absolutely. And that's why people don't
want to hear it and they don't want to
change the standard of care because
where is the money? Yeah, well that's
the thing. You're dealing with a
multi-billion dollar industry
uh that would have to then grope to find
another way to Now I'm not saying you
can't make money on any of this stuff.
All I'm saying is that
uh as long as we can manage diseases
without toxicity effectively. Uh I think
that's a a tremendous goal in and of
itself.
Uh if there's an entrepreneur that can
figure out how to make a buck on the
whole thing. Now I'm not against that
either. But but uh my my my my interest
is how can we keep how can we drop the
death rate of cancer uh significantly
uh while improving overall health. And
absolutely, just like Otto Warburg said,
80% of cancers can be prevented. And uh
um I think we can drop the death rate
massively in a very short period of time
if if the governments
uh if the health government agencies
would say, yes, cancer is not a genetic
disease, it's a mitochondrial metabolic
disease, and we want to we recommend
metabolic therapy to treat cancer. Boom,
the death rate would collapse
unbelievably.
So you said that earlier that um cancer
is overtaking or has overtaken heart
disease as the number one killer.
In China it certainly has and I just
heard in in Korea it has as well.
So um uh United States it's uh for
breast cancer
uh breast cancer uh in women has uh
become the number one killer over heart
disease. So um and it's happening slowly
around the the more we are into the
Western diet and lifestyle with highly
processed carbohydrate foods and reduced
exercise, the more at risk uh we're
going to be for cancer and all the other
chronic diseases. But uh cancer is the
one that people most fear. Uh I think it
sets the puts a fear of God into people
that they have this immediate impending
doom that their existence on the planet
is going to be shortly lived. And that's
that's that's missing Yeah, if you're
being irradiated and poisoned, that
might be true. But if you do metabolic
therapy uh that that I don't think is
the case and I think people people
should recognize that. You should not
Nobody should sell tell somebody they
have a terminal cancer. They they if
they do standard of care, that might be
terminal. But if you do metabolic
therapy, it might not be terminal. And
as you said that cancer can be
preventable if you have the right diet
and lifestyle and you live a stress-free
Try to live a stress-free existent and
try to try to enjoy life as well. It's
all these things that it's not just
food. It's not just these things that
we're hearing every day. It's the
holistic lifestyle that we have to live.
Yeah, you're absolutely correct. It's
the it's a whole composite of it's food,
diet, lifestyle, exercise uh uh and
stress management. You know, that's why
in our in our press pulse we talk about
um stress management as a major part of
the overall uh therapeutic process, part
of metabolic therapy. Uh music therapy,
massage therapy, acupuncture, whatever
whatever you do to reduce stress because
stress the a lot of cancer patients have
impending doom uh which causes their
cortical steroids to go up and they have
high blood sugar uh because they fear
that they're going to be dead from this
disease. So they have to be told and do
a variety of things to reduce the
stress, the blood sugar goes down,
metabolic therapy works a hell of a lot
better. So again, it's all part of the
package and I have that written in the
in the press pulse uh uh outline, the
framework for managing cancer. It's all
in there. It's just that the the medical
uh system uh needs to incorporate that
um into their uh treatment protocols.
And you said it right at the beginning
that uh the system Unfortunately, the
system prevents a lot of good willed
physicians to do what they know should
be done and what is right, but yet they
can't do it because the system controls
them. So then you have to go back and
say, well, who's running the system? Uh
and people say, oh, it's the government.
Well, who's the government? It's folks
like us. I mean, I know I have a lot of
friends who work in the government. So
the government is not some amorphous
thing. They're human beings that are
part of this government. So the system
is controlled by human beings. Okay, who
are the human beings in the system that
are maintaining the status quo, right?
And you got to say, who are these?
There's not many of them. You know, a
couple of folks that call the shots on a
few of these things. And the majority of
Congress and and senators and these
guys, they're clueless as to the biology
of of some of these health health
things. And they go go along more with
lobbyists and recommendations from from
from big companies. And uh who's running
the big company? You find the CEOs. The
boards of these big companies, they're
the system. And and they're the ones
calling the shots on a lot of this
stuff. But that doesn't necessarily mean
the system in general is is bad. Uh it
just means that things can be changed uh
as long as you get the right people. I
always find that
uh people uh all of a sudden who have
one viewpoint uh change their view
really fast when they're the ones uh uh
with the brain tumor. Uh when they're
the ones uh with the advanced lung
cancer. All of a sudden everything
changes in their view, right? Now, what
do you What can you do for me now? Um
and uh so it's amazing. I can't tell you
how many physicians have come to me with
those who have cancer that would rather
do metabolic therapy than do what the
system tells them to do. So um yeah, so
this is just natural human human uh
behavior. But uh but things can change.
There's no question about it. And with
cancer, uh people most people want to
live. Uh uh and they want to know that
there's something other than uh the
standards of care
uh that can be used or in combination
sometimes with standard of care that can
improve their outcome. Um and and these
are the things that will be coming once
people understand. So the who's going to
make the change in the system? The
people. Uh once you get enough people
knowing that there is something
different, the people will make the
change because they are the consumers of
what the system delivers. So the system
will change when the consumers demands
begin to change. So it's educating the
consumers and we have to recognize
that scientific literacy is is is uh is
very rare
uh in our societies. Uh most folks in
all societies are scientifically
illiterate.
So unfortunately, they have tough tough
time. But I I can tell you when you have
cancer, I wish my students could learn
stuff as quickly as the person that has
diagnosed with cancer. Oh, you That's
you see, that's the why. When you have
the why and when you have the disease
and when you have the cancer, you want
to know everything that you can to try
to fix this. But when you when you don't
have that in front of you, that
impending doom
the motivation is not there, is it?
No, you're right. You're absolutely
correct. Motivation is powerful. When
people are motivated, you can be you'd
be surprised how how incredibly uh
accomplished they become. It's
unbelievable. I wish my students could
do that. They're all young. They don't
have cancer, right? They don't They just
do it to take the class. But but later
on, they come calling me for years later
and say,
I'm trying to go back through my notes
now to find out what you said. And now
we do these, you know, we have all this
stuff that we've published open access.
So people just everything that I'm
saying is published. Uh if people people
always say, oh, he didn't explain it in
clear Well, read the paper. It's
published in the literature. All you
have to do is go go on to the web, look
my name up, and see the publications. If
you want more detail about what I'm
saying, if you if I'm Oh, he didn't say
this. He didn't tell me exactly what to
do and how to do it. Well, go into the
papers, you'll you'll find a little bit
more detail. But, we are writing a
treatment protocol as we speak, very
totally comprehensive.
Uh it's like a how-to manual
for anyone that knows anything. This is
exactly how you do it. And we have a
large number of co-authors on this paper
that we hope to publish hopefully by the
end of the year. We've been working on
it for a couple of years now. It's a
how-to manual for managing glioblastoma
brain cancer.
But, you know, with a couple of tweaks,
you can manage
all kinds of cancers the same. They're
all They all depend on fermentation.
So, once you understand their their
Achilles' heel, their weakness, it's not
that hard to go after it and get rid of
them. So,
but we you got to go for the cancers
that have no hope. Uh and that's
glioblastoma.
99% of people are dead within 10 years
95% within 5 years. So, the the hope for
GBM is is minimal.
But, if we can crack that open, if we
can extend survival by by five times,
fivefold,
two, three-fold, fivefold survival. Um
and you can say, well, if you can do
that for glioblastoma, can you do it for
lung, colon, breast? Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely. It's just that we don't want
to go into all those other cancers right
now because they're always telling us we
got all this other stuff. For GBM,
you've got nothing. And and as I tell
you, it's been 100 We have not made one
single advance in glioblastoma
management in 100 years, if you can
believe this. Really?
Yes, the survival for glioblastoma in
1926 was 18 to 14 months. Today, it's 15
to 16 months. So, you're talking about
zero impact over the over 100 years. So,
we can make a massive improvement in
that in a very quick period of time. If
if we were allowed, if the system allows
us to do what we need to do, we can make
huge improvements in cancer survival
very, very quickly. The problem is the
system does not permit that. You cannot
break the standard of care. You think it
would be malleable. You think it would
be
but it's not. It's like written in
granite granite. And so, there's a lot
of
self-interests in maintaining the status
quo. Um but, you got to break it down
because people are dying. We cannot let
this tragedy continue to happen. We're
losing all these good souls on the
planet because the system does not want
to change. So, how do you change the
system? You've got to educate the
people. Let them know that there's
something there that will work if you do
it the right way. And it doesn't have to
be toxic. You don't have to have your
brain irradiated. You don't have to have
all this crazy stuff that they do.
Uh yeah, so
I always say, prove me wrong. Show me
where the science that we have done is
cuz Otto Warburg said it originally. He
had the Nobel Prize for
for
discovering cytochrome c oxidase. I
mean, the guy was a giant. Uh but, the
gene the the tide the tidal wave of
genes washed him away.
Uh now, the genes have not given us the
promised land. We have to go back and
figure out what happened. Otto Warburg
was correct, not always, not completely.
We have now polished up, shown where he
was right, and where he was a little off
base, and we brought in all this new
stuff to show that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease that can
be that can be managed effectively with
metabolic therapy. And I wanted to just
quickly summarize the people that just
want that clip it off how do we fix your
mitochondrial dysfunction? It's through
metabolic therapy. So, metabolic
therapy, you focus on So, cancer drives
off two things, and I'm just
regurgitating everything that I've heard
from you. Cancer drives off two things.
You mentioned glucose
and glutamine.
I wanted to just ask cuz we know the
glucose, which is the elevated excess
sugar. Doesn't mean that you're just
eating a lot of sugar. It means that
over a long of long period of time, you
have a lot of blood glucose in your
body. It's elevated glucose. Okay. And
we can talk about how we can fix that
one, which is the ketogenic diet.
But, I just wanted to ask about the
glutamine because glutamine is an amino
acid. Mhm.
Yes.
How does that make cancer worse?
It it
This is a very important question. Now,
you're asking me to get into a little
bit more of the deep chemistry.
Sorry. Uh well, that's okay.
Um what Otto Warburg did not know is
that there is a
the glutamine fermentation. So,
and the field thinks glutamine is
respired, meaning that they that that
the mitochondria in cancer cells are
healthy.
Wrong. They're not They're not healthy.
They're they're sick.
However, in the mitochondria, uh there
is a part of the
of the pathway that called the glutamine
glutaminolysis pathway, where the amino
acid glutamine
can be fermented to get energy without
oxygen.
Not linked to oxidative phosphorylation.
So, it's a second fermentation pathway
that Otto Warburg and most of the cancer
field does not know about. But, my my
good friend and colleague
Kristof Chinopoulos from Semmelweis
University in
Budapest, Hungary, is the world leader
on this pathway.
And we Kristof and I have shown clearly
that this pathway is operational in
cancer cells in the mitochondria. So,
this has confused the field because the
field says, oh, mitochondria are still
making ATP
and still taking in oxygen. Therefore,
Warburg must be wrong. Oh, this is the
the big fallacy. The mitochondria in
cancer are taking in oxygen, but it's
not linked to
ATP through oxygen. It's linked to the
ATP from glutamine fermentation.
So, so you got glucose fermentation on
one hand producing carbon so the cells
can grow and a little bit of energy in
the cytoplasm, and then you get
glutamine fermentation in the
mitochondria that gives the nitrogen so
DNA and RNA can be synthesized in the
tumor cells, and again, additional
energy. So, you got to know the
biochemistry of of the problem to know
how these cancer cells are living. Now,
if you target glutamine alone, the
cancer cell will survive on the glucose.
If you target glucose alone, the cancer
cell can survive on the glutamine. So,
you have to target them both together.
And the issue is the cancer cell cannot
use fatty acids or ketones because the
mitochondria are dysfunctional. So, the
fatty acids and ketones that you have in
a ketogenic diet or low
low GKI value is is used for the brain
and for the rest of the normal cells in
the body.
So, the ketones and fatty acids are
allowing the rest of our cells to
survive without glucose. So, they can
use an alternative fuel. Cancer cells
can't do that. They're trapped into this
fermentation mechanism. So, the solution
to the cancer problem simultaneously
restrict the two fermentable fuels
driving the dysregulated growth while
transitioning the entire body off to a
fuel that's good for the normal cells,
but not good for the tumor cells. So,
this is the solution to the cancer
problem, absolutely. It's just going to
take time for the field to come to
understand how to do this. You know, is
this a cure for cancer? We don't know.
And we don't like to use the term cancer
cure cuz we have no idea. Is it a Is it
a a therapeutic benefit to manage
cancer? Absolutely. Will it cure cancer?
We don't know, but it can manage it. And
we would say it's the it will be the
most effective way to manage cancer.
Whether or not it's cured, we have no
idea. But, we don't know. The only thing
we do know is it worked really well. It
cured cancer in a dog that had a big
mass tumor on his published that as
well. His dog lived died of old age from
heart disease, but the tumor that was
supposed to kill it many years earlier
dissolved. Um so, people can read that.
I published that on the open access web.
People It's getting a lot of lot of
attention in the veterinary world
because you can manage these cancers in
dogs just as well with metabolic
therapy. So, again, it's unbelievable.
Yeah, because cancers in dogs and humans
and rats and mice, they all ferment.
They're all fermenters, regardless of
what organ they come from. So, I just
pull the plug on their fermentation
fuels while transitioning the whole body
over to ketones, and these tumor cells
up and dying.
You throw in a few drugs that push the
system along a little bit more
effectively, and you and you can you
live with the disease. You don't have to
feel this impending doom. You're in
charge of your own own existence. So,
you just Yeah, you have somebody
Physicians need to know this. This is
the tool of the future. I just told you
the future of cancer management in in
the western world.
You don't So, it's just a matter of
time. And it is just a matter of time,
and people it's kind of like, you know,
even keto or even carnivore or even all
these these diets that have taken time
to adjust in the people understanding
that cholesterol is not bad for you.
Cholesterol doesn't cause heart disease,
all these different things. But, I did
want to clarify that so people could
understand metabolic therapy, what that
means. Glucose and glutamine. You're
targeting those two things, not just
one, not just the other. So, one is
using a bit of drugs for the glutamine
to target and kill it. The other one is
the ketogenic diet. It could be keto,
carnivore. But, I really I love talking
about foods. So, talking about this side
of things, the glucose, because people
really understand foods. So, I really
wanted to just briefly, as a last thing,
to talk about the worst foods that feed
cancer cells.
If you could give a list of them, what
would they be so that people can just
totally avoid them?
Um, highly processed foods.
Do you have a book there? I have my I
have my Twinkie.
Oh. I bought Twinkies uh 10 years ago
when they when we thought Hostess was
going out of business.
And I carry a box of Twinkies. And uh I
can pull it out. It's I have it up
there.
Um, the uh the the Twinkie
made 10 years ago uh I can put it on a
store shelf and people will buy it think
it was fresh. Um, it's like all
chemical. Um, uh highly processed as a
matter of fact, if you look at the
ingredients of a Twinkie, uh most of the
terms most people can't even pronounce
the the names of the chemicals that are
in Twinkies. Um, highly processed
carbohydrate foods. And that includes uh
high fructose corn syrup. Uh in fact,
they're now some companies are are
saying contains glucose rather than high
fructose corn syrup.
Because I think it sounds better because
they know the fructose is the bad one,
right? It's the marketing thing.
yeah, so I think anything that comes
packaged, which is almost 90% of what we
eat is packaged in some way. Um, uh
because it has shelf life. Once you give
something shelf life, foods should not
have long shelf lives. Uh good food will
spoil on you real quick. Um, so
uh you know, but that's
those healthy foods uh but most people
don't have access to that. We live in
food Some people live in food deserts uh
where you only have highly processed
carbohydrates. And a lot of people
aren't aware of that. So you put all
this together and you have a you have a
a problem. A
uh
epidemics of obesity and cancer and all
this other stuff. Um, but there's so
almost everything that we eat is highly
contains highly processed carbs. So
people are going to say, well, I'm going
to go start the death of everything in
my neighborhood is is this. And and the
answer is unfortunately yes. Um, this is
the the problem. And anything that comes
wrapped up in a package uh is some sort
of a process that had to go into
producing that. But again, don't eat too
much of it. Um, you know, and then the
meats organic you know, people people
say, oh, you know, free-range meat is
tough. Um, well, you can sous vide it.
Sous vide it. You can get the the
toughness out of it. But um
and it's also more expensive. People
say, oh, grass-fed beef, you got to pay
twice as much than corn. Corn-fed beef
is beef is much more tender. It's much
more but it doesn't have the flavor that
Well, I go through all this stuff
because we talked to people about all
these things. I know the what goes on
behind all the all the stuff that
the thing. Yeah, they're made to taste
very very good. You got to realize
the like okay, even these small things.
So even in the carnivore world or even
in the keto world, we talk about, you
know, grass-fed beef versus grain-fed
beef. The fact is you're eating beef
versus Doritos.
Okay? Like you've got processed chips
versus meat. Maybe that animal wasn't
fed the best diet, but they have a
four-chamber stomach to actually break
down all the crap that they've been
eaten and it can be better for us. So
it's kind of like making better choices,
but I think that even in the meat-based
world, we still have highly processed
foods like deli meats.
Um and they're really not the greatest
for us. But if you are on a budget and
you can't afford any of these things,
get the fattiest cuts of meat because
fat is not going to be inflammatory. Is
that right?
Um, some some fats are. Um, you have to
be careful of them. You know, saturated
fat is what's broken down at the
ketones. But getting back to what you
said about the cold cuts and things, uh
I I I you know, I'm not a food expert. I
don't really know a lot about that
stuff. But if all I know is we if you
eat very little of it, um
generally doesn't harm you that much.
It's when you start eating a lot of it.
That's a fair point. That's a fair point
because how much of the carbohydrates do
we eat in excess? And that's the same
thing with vegetables. Even though
vegetables aren't inherently bad for
you, but the fact that we were told so
much to eat so many vegetables, that's
why a lot of people can have some gut
issues. But if if you're talking about
our ancestors, they weren't eating that
many vegetables. It was like a small
handful full. And then as you said, they
were fasting for days, walking miles
upon miles to kill an animal to eat. So
the age is very different. Well, you can
see that um
gorillas uh versus humans,
uh gorillas have a big gut. They have a
big belly uh because they're plant
eaters. So uh plant eaters have to have
much longer digestive tract than than
carnivore people car car than carnivores
because you can get the energy out of
meat much faster than you can get the
energy out of plants. So if you look at
the gorilla, uh the gorilla compared to
the chimpanzee, uh the gorilla has a
bigger gut because it it's a it's a
purely um um vegetarian kind of uh uh
animal. Where the chimp is is more
omnivorous.
Uh they'll eat vegetables and meat.
They'll eat a they'll eat a lot of
different things. But gorillas are
pretty much lo- locked locked into the
vegetation vegetarian kind of
uh diet. Where humans are omnivo-
omnivores. If we were if we evolved to
eat plants, we would have a big gut like
the gorilla has. Um, but we don't. And
um
we're we can eat anything that walks,
crawls, or flies on this planet. That's
how we evolved. We were not too
particular. Uh even eat each other for
crying out loud to get some sort of a
spiritual thing. You go back in these
societies, right? Um, that's how they
got kuru, which is a brain disease from
from eating the flesh of your dead
relative that had I mean, you can see
all the crazy stuff that we as a species
have done over the millennia. But but um
no, I mean, our diet is quite varied. Uh
we can go from complete vegetarian or or
vegan all the way up to pure carnivore.
But we have to be have balanced
nutrition. And what works for one person
may not work for another person. So
everybody has to work their own what
they think is best for them. And uh and
I think I that's why we developed the
glucose ketone index. At least it's one
quantitative measure that allows people
to know about this rather than guessing.
Um, so but any event, I I think that um
yeah, food nutrition is very important.
We have a problem uh in availability of
the things that are really the most and
the uh cost is higher, the availability
is less, and therefore we're trapped
into eating highly processed
carbohydrates in a in an in a in a new
cultural system where exercise is not as
uh re-
undertaken as much as it was in the
past. Um, and then and then we overdo
it. We we go out and and run like crazy
uh to see think and get and then we uh
you know, we had hip replacements
coming. Everybody's getting a hip
replacement uh
knee replacements and all this kind of
stuff because they they're trying to run
trying to do too much exercise too fast.
Obsessive-compulsive behavior is also a
problem
among us.
two extremes. It's the high carbohydrate
processed food, sit on the couch, and
watch Netflix. And then you have those,
you know, let me just be really really
strict on something and like run so much
to burn calories. Or it's a you know,
we're somewhere in the middle. The
middle, which is, you know, my
grandfather or my grandfather's
grandfather, what they were eating.
Whole unprocessed foods in smaller
quantities, move, be happy, and the
levels of chronic inflammation were so
low. Cancer, heart disease, brain
disease, kidney disease, liver disease.
Right now, it's just exponential. And
it's coming to the same root cause.
That's why the work that you do is so
important. So thank you for that. Well,
I just want to say this is a great time
to finish everything cuz I think that we
have spoken so much on every topic that
points to the fact that cancer is
preventable. It is something that we can
have control over if we have the right
lifestyle and diet. But I just want to
say a big thank you for coming on and
sharing everything all your research.
And if people want to see more of you,
where can they find more of your work?
Well, as I said, we we publish they can
go just put my name into uh Google and
publications. And anything that's open
access uh anybody can read. So um it's
not hidden behind some wall. Some
it's out there. It's out there for
everybody to read. Uh but uh and they
some they just have to read the papers.
And then we have a lot of YouTube videos
and we continue to publish this
research. And uh we we and we have case
reports. If you want to read about Pablo
Kelly, the guy with the brain tumor
who's out now
uh over 8 years, uh you can read about
Pablo email Pablo. Uh he has where he
can even talk to him. Say, well, I don't
Pablo, I don't believe you're still
alive. Well, well, he'll tell you, well,
I'm alive and here's my history and
here's all the records. So um people can
make up their own their own mind about
this. But again, open access uh
on the web,
uh they have access to everything that
I'm saying. So
so they can do that.
Well, I'll try to link Professor
Seefried's open access papers in the
description of this video so you can
just click there, open it, read it, and
find all the information that you need.
But thank you so much for your time
today and I'm sure we're going to see
you very soon. Well, well, thank you
very much, Rina. It was nice to be here.
I hope you loved this interview with Dr.
Seefried all about how to prevent
cancer. Now, if you want to know how to
prevent heart disease, you need to watch
this video with Dr. Philip Ovadia. He'll
talk about the one food that is
destroying your heart and how to use
diet to reverse heart disease. I'll see
you guys next week.